README.md, before:

# Learning-Factored-Representation-via-SSL
Project objectives:
* Decouple state representation and policy learning.
* Learn disentangled representation.
* Ablation studies for data diet.
* Training dynamics analysis to see ***how*** disentangled representations emerge.

This project was made for "CSCI2952X-Research Topics in Self Supervised Learning" at Brown University.

# Code Map - SSL
* Access the model training and user-specific configs here: `configs/ssl_configs/ssl_methods` and `configs/ssl_configs/user/$USER`.
* The custom dataset wrapper for RL rollout + SSL: `data/ssl_dataset`.
* The evaluation metrics for embeddings: `disentanglement_metrics`.
* The proposed model architecture code: `models/ssl_models`.
* The main trainer function: `train.py`.

# File Structure - RL

```
data \
  data_loader.py \
  data_generator.py \
  data_saver.py \
  src \
    observations \
    data.csv \
models \
  TED \
    ...py files... \
  expert \
  visual \
  model1 \
  model2 \
  policy_head \
    ...ppo and dqn... \
configs \
  VISSL \
    ... yaml file ... \
  models \
    ... yaml file ... \
  data_generator \
    ... yaml file ... \
evals \
  policy \
  disentanglement \
  interpretability \
tests \
  PyTorch_vision_tests \
```

# SSL Setup
```bash
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -e .
```

> **Caution**: You will need to create user specific configs for $USER run command to work. Create them here: `configs/ssl_configs/user/$USER`.

# run ssl training script
```bash
source .venv/bin/activate
echo $USER
```

Train with the data generator which does rollout but doesn't update policy, i.e., offline RL.

If you want to run on local machine or in an interact session:
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/barlow_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm
```

If you want to run as a sbatch script sent to SLURM:
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/barlow_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm -m
```

Run method 1
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/covariance_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm -m
```

Run method 2
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/mask_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm -m
```

Run eval only for debugging
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/barlow_rl_eval.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm -m
```

Run train+eval for debugging
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/barlow_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_debug -m
```

# Interpreting the labels for the RL dataset:
* The state or the normalized state information is label.
* Example:
```bash
{'agent_dir': np.int64(1), 'agent_pos': (np.int64(4), np.int64(6)), 'door_locked': 0, 'door_open': 0, 'door_pos': (np.int64(2), np.int64(3)), 'goal_pos': (np.int64(3), np.int64(3)), 'holding_key': 0, 'key_pos': (np.int64(4), np.int64(4))}
[np.float64(0.3333333333333333), np.float64(0.5), np.float64(0.75), np.float64(0.0), np.float64(0.0), np.float64(0.25), np.float64(0.375), np.float64(0.375), np.float64(0.375), np.float64(0.0), np.float64(0.5), np.float64(0.5)]
```
* Each value in the state is normalized by [value - min(0 here)/[max(8 here) - min(0 here)]]

# SSL model architecture and experiment design:
* To make a fair comparison with PPO online learning (coupled representation and policy learning), we use "Nature CNN" as the trunk of the SSL model.
* Each experiment is done for 3 seeds: 0, 1 and 2.
* Dataset size: For the experiment on the impact of data diet and proportion of total data required for SSL-based offline feature extractor learning, we use dataset sizes 1mil, 2mil and 3mil. This is done since the RL algorithm ranges from using 4mil images when using raw image input to 600k when using expert feature.
* We use 3 different learning schemes:
  * A supervised learning baseline where the model is trained to predict the expert features of each state.
  * A Barlow Twins model.
  * Our proposed SSL learning algorithm which uses the current state's image and the next state's image along with the action taken based on a random policy (100% exploration).
  * Models are trained for 250 epochs/till convergence.

# Experiment commands:

* Supervised:
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/supervised_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=900000 ++data.test_out.limit=100000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/supervised_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=1800000 ++data.test_out.limit=200000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/supervised_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=2700000 ++data.test_out.limit=300000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m
```

* Barlow Twins:
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/barlow_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=900000 ++data.test_out.limit=100000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/barlow_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=1800000 ++data.test_out.limit=200000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/barlow_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=2700000 ++data.test_out.limit=300000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m
```

* Covariance Reduction Method for Factorization:
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/covariance_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=900000 ++data.test_out.limit=100000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/covariance_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=1800000 ++data.test_out.limit=200000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/covariance_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=2700000 ++data.test_out.limit=300000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m
```

* Masked Factorization:
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/mask_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=900000 ++data.test_out.limit=100000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/mask_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=1800000 ++data.test_out.limit=200000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/mask_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=2700000 ++data.test_out.limit=300000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m
```

Commit message:

add generic user configs for people to copy

README.md, after:

# Learning-Factored-Representation-via-SSL
Project objectives:
* Decouple state representation and policy learning.
* Learn disentangled representation.
* Ablation studies for data diet.
* Training dynamics analysis to see ***how*** disentangled representations emerge.

This project was made for "CSCI2952X-Research Topics in Self Supervised Learning" at Brown University.

# Code Map - SSL
* Access the model training and user-specific configs here: `configs/ssl_configs/ssl_methods` and `configs/ssl_configs/user/$USER`.
* The custom dataset wrapper for RL rollout + SSL: `data/ssl_dataset`.
* The evaluation metrics for embeddings: `disentanglement_metrics`.
* The proposed model architecture code: `models/ssl_models`.
* The main trainer function: `train.py`.

# File Structure - RL

```
data \
  data_loader.py \
  data_generator.py \
  data_saver.py \
  src \
    observations \
    data.csv \
models \
  TED \
    ...py files... \
  expert \
  visual \
  model1 \
  model2 \
  policy_head \
    ...ppo and dqn... \
configs \
  VISSL \
    ... yaml file ... \
  models \
    ... yaml file ... \
  data_generator \
    ... yaml file ... \
evals \
  policy \
  disentanglement \
  interpretability \
tests \
  PyTorch_vision_tests \
```

# SSL Setup
```bash
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -e .
```

> **Caution**: You will need to create user specific configs for $USER run command to work. Create them here: `configs/ssl_configs/user/$USER`.

# run ssl training script
```bash
source .venv/bin/activate
echo $USER # or use export USER=general for user-agnostic environment
```

Train with the data generator which does rollout but doesn't update policy, i.e., offline RL.

If you want to run on local machine or in an interact session:
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/barlow_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm
```

If you want to run as a sbatch script sent to SLURM:
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/barlow_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm -m
```

Run method 1
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/covariance_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm -m
```

Run method 2
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/mask_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm -m
```

Run eval only for debugging
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/barlow_rl_eval.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm -m
```

Run train+eval for debugging
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/barlow_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_debug -m
```

# Interpreting the labels for the RL dataset:
* The state or the normalized state information is label.
* Example:
```bash
{'agent_dir': np.int64(1), 'agent_pos': (np.int64(4), np.int64(6)), 'door_locked': 0, 'door_open': 0, 'door_pos': (np.int64(2), np.int64(3)), 'goal_pos': (np.int64(3), np.int64(3)), 'holding_key': 0, 'key_pos': (np.int64(4), np.int64(4))}
[np.float64(0.3333333333333333), np.float64(0.5), np.float64(0.75), np.float64(0.0), np.float64(0.0), np.float64(0.25), np.float64(0.375), np.float64(0.375), np.float64(0.375), np.float64(0.0), np.float64(0.5), np.float64(0.5)]
```
* Each value in the state is normalized by [value - min(0 here)/[max(8 here) - min(0 here)]]

# SSL model architecture and experiment design:
* To make a fair comparison with PPO online learning (coupled representation and policy learning), we use "Nature CNN" as the trunk of the SSL model.
* Each experiment is done for 3 seeds: 0, 1 and 2.
* Dataset size: For the experiment on the impact of data diet and proportion of total data required for SSL-based offline feature extractor learning, we use dataset sizes 1mil, 2mil and 3mil. This is done since the RL algorithm ranges from using 4mil images when using raw image input to 600k when using expert feature.
* We use 3 different learning schemes:
  * A supervised learning baseline where the model is trained to predict the expert features of each state.
  * A Barlow Twins model.
  * Our proposed SSL learning algorithm which uses the current state's image and the next state's image along with the action taken based on a random policy (100% exploration).
  * Models are trained for 250 epochs/till convergence.

# Experiment commands:

* Supervised:
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/supervised_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=900000 ++data.test_out.limit=100000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/supervised_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=1800000 ++data.test_out.limit=200000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/supervised_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=2700000 ++data.test_out.limit=300000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m
```

* Barlow Twins:
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/barlow_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=900000 ++data.test_out.limit=100000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/barlow_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=1800000 ++data.test_out.limit=200000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/barlow_rl.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=2700000 ++data.test_out.limit=300000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m
```

* Covariance Reduction Method for Factorization:
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/covariance_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=900000 ++data.test_out.limit=100000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/covariance_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=1800000 ++data.test_out.limit=200000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/covariance_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=2700000 ++data.test_out.limit=300000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m
```

* Masked Factorization:
```bash
python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/mask_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=900000 ++data.test_out.limit=100000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/mask_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=1800000 ++data.test_out.limit=200000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m

python train.py --config-name=ssl_methods/mask_factor.yaml user@_global_=$USER/run_slurm ++optim.epochs=250 ++hardware.seed=0 ++data.base.limit=2700000 ++data.test_out.limit=300000 ++model.backbone_model=NatureCNN ++hydra.launcher.partition=3090-gcondo -m
```
